Master's degree and we had a Ph.D.
in business I think at that time.
It wasn't long.
I'm almost sure we had, they didn't have a Ph.D.
in marketing.
We had a Ph.D.
in business.
We eventually had a Ph.D.
in marketing probably.
in the, by mid-'70s or so, late-'70s, and began to turn out our own PhDs in marketing.
Do you remember when you all began, when you began to deal with some graduate students?
Oh, I dealt with those and began teaching graduate classes probably in 1970 or 71.
Because we had, we'd offered graduate classes.
It was just whether or not we offered, we had an MS.
There was an MS program out there, an MS in marketing.
And they could major in marketing.
Yeah, yeah.
In those years, where did the products of the marketing department, the undergraduate, where were they primarily?
Oh, they were going over to the small teacher schools, I think.
One went up to Baylor and one went over to Huntsville.
That's the graduate program?
That's in the PhD.
That's the PhD kids.
Kids went over there.
Where did the undergraduates and the masters go?
Oh, they go in the typical places.
They, you know, they were going with the Procter & Gamble's, and they were going, excuse me, the Ralston Perrinas, and they were going with the IBM's, and they were going with the Sears Roebuck, and some going with Wallace's Prenny, and some going, you know, mom and dad shows.
But we were not having a lot of people down here like you have now chasing after our kids where, you know, we're going to have a career fair here in four weeks and there will be 200 firms down here looking for our graduates.
How did the student and the company make the connection then?
Well, Herb Thompson did a lot of that.
Herb Thompson, if he found a kid who hadn't got a job and he liked the kid, Herb would get on the phone.
And he'd call somebody to somebody and says, you know, I need you to take a look at this kid.
All right, did the others, did the youngsters make the connections themselves?
A lot of it.
We had, I guess, a career center here.
I don't know too much about it.
It had a few people.
But it was pretty lightweight.
Nothing like it is now.
When did you begin to think that A&M began to play in the big leagues?
Oh probably when Bill Mewes came in.
John had to leave, not had to leave, I don't mean him like that, but when John left and Bill Mewes came in.
Bill Mewes was a, and John took us I think as far as we could go.
And Bill came in, management by objectives, very goal.
Now we sat down and wrote a mission statement.
Now we sat down and said, where do we want to go?
How are we going to get there?
How many people are you going to need?
Describe this fellow, Bill Meuse.
My impression is quite serious.
He and I were very good friends and you would not see the light side of him until you got him out from behind his Dean's desk.
He came from?
He came from Omaha, I believe.
That's right, University of Nebraska.
Nebraska of Omaha, and prior to that had been over at Boone State or Appalachian State in Boone.
Western North Carolina.
Boone, North Carolina.
And came in, and I hadn't met him at all until
He, you know, was, came onto this job and
Earl Bennett was kind of the associate dean, and I was department head, and we would have regular meetings, and we would meet for an hour, an hour, and we were off and going.
What were those meetings, what was the theme of those meetings?
The theme, well there was an agenda, and the theme of those meetings was each department got the report, what was happening,
any problems they had with enrollments or we didn't talk budget or funds that was you know only at the time that it took to do that but you sure didn't take out oh last year's budget and add five percent and use the same words again because he had a different method for that and he wanted you had a one-on-one discussion with him about your particular department and your faculty
And you talked to, it was, for lack of a better term, more business-like.
Structured.
Am I correct in understanding you are inferring to me that John Pearson in Huttensight was the right man for this place at that time?
Absolutely, I think.
And then Bill Mewes was the right person?
Yeah.
You know, John, if you look at it, John is pretty much a political animal, I thought.
And as you know that he liked to play poker with some of his old cronies, and they'd play every so often.
I think Calhoun was in on this, and I don't know if Mack was in on this or not, but it might have been.
There were several.
Then Winerti was in there, and there was either a Monday night or a Tuesday night, once a month or whenever, and they would sit and play poker.
And there was probably a lot of discussion.
going on that.
Or at least a lot of ideas planted.
And I just think that a lot got done on that side of it.
Now, with Muse, do you remember there being an appropriate amount of faculty and involvement in the dean search?
There may have been.
There probably was.
I wasn't, I don't recall.
As far as you're aware, though, was the selection process a positive factor in his entry?
He didn't have anything to undo.
No, I don't think there was, no, no, there was nothing to undo.
And he came in and he was very positive and he did one other thing, or someone did, he hired Bill Mobley.
And Bill Mowgli, I was department head of management, I mean marketing, and Bill Mowgli was department head of management.
What were your first impressions of him?
Oh, I liked Bill.
I liked Bill Mowgli.
Where did he come from?
Do you remember?
Bill came, uh, no, I can't remember.
I can't remember.
But he, South Carolina maybe, or somewhere like that.
He had been with Pittsburgh Plate and Gas, but I can't recall, I think he'd come from the South somewhere.
He went to Denton, Denison in Ohio as an undergraduate.
And he had been with the human resource people, was a good scholar, and really a fun guy to work with and later to work for.
And he was one of your colleagues.
He was your... He was a peer of mine.
That's what I mean.
And then he... Bill asked me
to say I came in and stepped in as interim associate dean knowing that I wasn't going to be associate dean.
And Bill didn't have plans for me for that.
But he asked me what I would like to run, and I said I'd like to run the undergraduate programs.
And he said fine.
Now this is under Bill?
Muse.
And then Bill Mobley became associate dean.
And so the executive committee then, and a guy by the name of Lyle Schoenfeld took over as head of the management department.
And we hired a guy by the name of John Dinkle about that time, came in to help turn Banner around.
That's business analysis.
Business analysis.
And Lyle Schoenfeld took over Bill Mobley's plot as head of the management department.
What about accounting in those days?
Accounting's always been strong.
I can't recall who was department.
I've probably been Jim Benjamin.
He's been around a long time, but Gary Shugart was before him.
And Strausser was always smart enough not to be department head, and I was associate dean with John Pearson, but I don't think he ever wanted to be department head.
Under Bill Mewes, were y'all, did he expect you to be the department head
to run things, are the department chairman to- No, no.
We were department heads, and we were to solve our problems.
And of course, most of us, Mobley and myself, and I can't say about the others, but Mobley and I were pretty open.
You know, there may have been others that said, you're going to do it this way.
But Clint Phillips was over in finance at one time.
Of course, Clint moved out and then moved up.
And I can't recall who overtook over the finance department.
Oh, I know.
The guy that ran the Center for Enterprise.
Bill.
No, no.
We'll think about that.
But followed John Allen over there at Center for Free Enterprise.
And y'all, when did y'all move to a new location?
We moved in 1980 over to Blocker Building.
So you stayed in Francis?
We stayed in Francis till 1980 and then in 1980,
or 81, we moved over to Blocker.
And there's an interesting story, you may or may not recall, and I think you do, is that, and Jack Williams was president, they put a moratorium on buildings at that year and said Texas A&M can't have any more buildings.
Well, they didn't define the size of the building.
So it's my understanding that the College of Business is supposed to have a building dimensions of X, Y, Z. It now had an X squared, Y squared, and Z squared, and we just made it bigger.
And so we called it the Academic and Administration.
We called it the ANA.
Now the community, the girls, I mean with the girls here, they got a different nomenclature than the ANAs.
creativity and thought.
But we were over at Blocker then until 95.
And then we came over here on the campus.
Can you give some other examples of the quality of leadership under Mews and then Mobley?
Well, I was always impressed with Bill Mews.
he I think he he set out a five-year goal plan oh and uh uh Don Hellriggle was hired I think after somewhere along and Don was stepped in and out from time to time but Don
Don, a real organizer, and Hellriegel with Muse and Mobley.
I think the three of those, those three heads, guys, those three heads together, and with Muse giving the leadership, began to set out.
We tried to work more with engineering.
We tried to identify our own honors program people.
We began to put in this thing when Lyle Schoenfeld came in and Bill Mobley was associate dean and Bill Mews was the dean.
We put in the CBA fellows program.
We began to take our better talent and polish it so that we could parade it to the Arthur Andersons and the Marwick and Mitchells and the Big 12 at that time or the Big 8.
And we introduced the career fair for the first time under Bill Mews.
I think we may have had 20 firms here that first year, and now this year we're going to have 200 here.
And it's all done by the kids.
There are no faculty out there hustling.
So he put a lot of energy.
I mean, he created a lot of energy among the faculty.
Were there some corporations or outside organizations that became important allies in these?
Well, he put together an advisory committee.
And Bob Allen, who's now, I don't know if Bob's chairman of the regents now, but Bob was on our original one.
Former mayor of Fort Worth up there.
Wiley was on here.
I can't recall some of them but we all had he went out and got big names to help us get some visibility and he would meet with them twice a year and with that group twice a year plus I'm sure he made individual calls on them trying to hustle and tried to ratchet up the Center for Executive Development and brought in a guy
What's Winnie's name?
Sings in the choir.
Bob, she sings in the choir.
Her husband died, and I should know because he's a teak.
You don't mean Van Arsdale.
No, no, no.
Winnie.
You don't mean Poirier.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
I'm talking about in talk on my mind.
Bob?
Nelson.
Oh.
Winnie Nelson, who sings in the choir there in the church.
Bob Nelson was brought in from the University of Illinois to help
you know, ratchet up the CED program.
We began to work with Skip Porter over in engineering, trying to do some entrepreneur adventurer's stuff, taking their patents and seeing what we could do with it.
Continue to work through that Sea Grant program as much as we could doing things.
I continued to work through the Sea Grant program.
And, as you know, then Bill moved up and Mobley stepped in.
Were there any differences in the style of the two?
Not really, except, you know, Bill Mews being, coming out of a, really, he's
He's less of a marketing man than he is a management by objectives man in a very, very systematic style.
Bill Mobley seemed to have a much more openness to him and always wanted to make sure that you felt welcome in his office.
And probably Bill Mewes might say, Sam, I don't want you doing that anymore.
Bill Mewes might say, Sam, you ought to consider whether you want to stop doing that.
You should be doing that.
And both ways were acceptable to me because I understood where the authority lied, but it was a little bit different approach.
And although neither was a Texan, neither had gone to school in this day, they both adapted well, did they not?
Yeah, well, you know, Muses from Natchitoches, Louisiana,
I'd forgotten that.
That's where he went to school.
So he was far removed.
Northwestern Louisiana State or Natchitoches.
So I think he considers himself much more Southern than, but yeah, they both acclimated this institute and both of them were great for our college.
And what was good is that I thought Mobley just took off running
after Bill Mewes left.
I don't think there was a heartbeat skip.
You know and then we had the interim dean for a while and then Benton came and Benton comes out of another place.
Now Benton's Texan.
And Benton came to us from Provost at former dean and then Provost at Houston and came here and has done an extremely good job.
Back under the two bills, do you remember any
thing that they tried to do that didn't get done?
Do you remember any frustrations?
Oh, I think they all, yeah, I think they were, we've all had a frustration at the Center for Economic Development.
I mean, Center for, yeah, Center for Executive Development, I mean.
Just can't, we just can't quite sell that to the state of Texas.
University of Texas does a good job.
They got a, you know, program over there.
Dallas is easier because of the access.
You know, it's pretty hard to bring
this program and so we've got an executive development program, executive development program here and then we got an executive MBA but we don't teach it here.
We teach it at the Woodlands.
We realized you got to go to, you got to go to your market to get them because of those guys.
So it took us a while to straighten that out and we'll put together a good EMBA program.
I can't think of anything that probably fell on its face.
Some of the things that we did with engineering just didn't quite—those entrepreneurial programs were pretty light.
Now, and during, in the 70s and 80s, with whom did you and your colleagues in business, who did you kind of keep a watch on to see how A&M was comparing?
Who were the comparators?
Well, you always would want to compare it against the Big Ten.
Okay.
I don't think we ever got ourselves to where we would compare with, you know, the private schools, the Stanford's and the Harvard's and the Chicago's.
If we could get somebody out of those programs, we had a feather in the cab.
I think any time, back when Pearson was here, any time we got anybody out of the Big Ten, that was Bob Page, who I roomed with, came out of Indiana that year in 68, and I'd come from Illinois.
Barbara Cole had come from Northwestern the year before.
But there, you know...
It's kind of hard, you know.
In those days, it was just awfully hard to get people out of those major schools, particularly private schools.
And the enrollment in the classes was exploding?
Growing, growing, growing.
We just needed more space.
They needed more faculty space.
If you look at our Wehner building here, room 159 holds 450.
The biggest room in Blocker was room 101 held 260.
And go back to Francis 202 held about 120.
And then from 120, you went down to the 30s in Francis Hall.
You might go over to Scotes and that big old auditorium there, teach a class in there.
But we didn't have a need for that Scotes or the chemistry.
We didn't have an accounting mayor, but we didn't.
But we outgrew Bakker and we're, I don't know if we, I'm teaching, we've got two marketing courses for beginning marketing, one for the non-business, one for the business.
We got 470, 420 in one and 450 or 60 in another one.
All right, now, back there when you became department head, did you cease your teaching or?
Yes and no, probably did.
I looked, but if I was short of faculty, I probably came in, you know.
I was still doing Sea Grant.
I, you know, have program rule travel.
I was traveling all over the United States, still doing that.
And part of the reason was I did it.
I don't think my faculty appreciated it.
I probably wasn't a very good department head.
Because I was a half-time C grader.
Now what that meant, and my faculty didn't realize, that meant summer teaching money
for my faculty because I get and so I they didn't quite realize they just didn't see me you know didn't see me there because I was half-time Sea Grant and so I wouldn't teach in the summer or maybe I wouldn't teach in the summer and I might teach something in the fall have a class but golly and then those guys wondered where we'd get the money for them to teach in the summer well where they got the money in teaching in the summer and their graduate assistant money was Sam Gillespie had about a hundred and forty thousand dollars worth of Sea Grant money
During your times as department head, what were the biggest difficulties you had in trying to get money for something you needed?
No, I didn't have to try that.
We didn't have that many needs.
You know, it had to be salary money.
And with what I was doing with half, while we had a little bit of graduate assistant money and what I was doing with a half of my salary,
We could go, we could get down the road quite a way.
I didn't have that problem like the guys have to get a lab or anything like that.
Describe your style as department head in evaluating faculty and in any feedback.
How did you let them know what your recommendations were going to be?
I, John, it was very clear John wanted a research track record because that's how you're going to get your students.
When I came in as department head, there wasn't much being done, a lot of publications.
So my first year, I sat down, and I had teaching, research, and service, and I had a little criteria, and I put all our faculty on that.
And then I looked at my salaries and said, what are these guys worth?
What are these guys getting?
And one year I gave John's salary money back.
I bet there's not anybody that ever gave money back.
And I went to John and I said, I don't think these guys are producing.
And I went to my faculty and I said, I turn money back.
Because you guys are, the next year I had one guy had six pubs.
I had another guy had three pubs plus another eight out on the street.
and between and that year which between 75 and 78 if you would look at what came out and got published in 79 and 80 and 81 out of that effort the Department of Marketing probably out published most other schools in the country probably one of the top 10 producers in those five years and why was it because you didn't pay them now you're going to pay them
You tell them, you pay, and they understood what the bottom line was and the publications came.
And once they got into that, once they got into the publication site, it became natural for them because they could get their graduate students and they could get their research and they could get stuff out.
I felt good about that.
I'm not sure that they felt good about that, but I felt good about doing that and would kind of chuckle.
There was one professor, one guy who was an associate professor, could never get promoted to full.
And I'm not sure that he and John Pearson were on the best relationships.
And one time we were up, and I can remember before we were up in this little room at the executive committee.
We were going through promotion and tenure.
And we'd go down the alphabet.
And marketing's last.
And so it got to me and I put up who was going to go up for tenure and maybe pay raises or whatever it was.
But, and he said, I guess that is.
And I said, no, no, we got one other one.
I said, what is it?
And I said, well, I want to put up this professor.
And John got up and left and he says, I'm not going to support him.
You guys can talk about him all you want.
And I didn't get a pay raise that year.
Everybody else got a pay raise.
I mean we're talking about 10% pay raise.
I didn't get a pay raise.
John called me in.
He said, Sam, you know, I give people merit raises based on my perceptions of how they run the department.
You made a bad decision putting these guys up, and the reason you didn't get a pay raise is because you did that.
And I said, I understand.
And so the next year, the guy wanted to go up and I said, I can't afford to put you up.
I just, I just took a hickey for you last year.
I'm not going to do it again this year.
And John, bless his heart, John and I, up until his death, still chuckled about that, because I understood.
And it was very clear why he didn't.
He didn't, not that he didn't like me.
He liked me.
I know John liked me, he says, but I, I can't, I can't do that.
All right.
During that period that you, when you were department head, how did you evaluate teaching quality?
We didn't have teacher evaluations.
Well, how did you?
As department head, you heard enough of it coming over the transom.
And we didn't have bad teachers.
We really didn't.
Herb Thompson did a, I mean, he had the guys in their pocket.
Barbara Coe Davis did a great job.
I did a reasonably good job, I guess.
And then Jim in those days was doing a pretty good job.
And you mentioned service.
What was service?
I don't know.
You know, you look at are they attending the meetings, you know, professional meetings, are they on committees, are they reviewing papers for the conferences, what are they doing at the university level?
For example, when, you know, I was on your centennial committee there, I'm sure that was considered a service piece.
Then under Bill Mewes and then Bill Mobley,
Did the same kinds of measurements continue?
Yeah, but more formalized.
Okay.
They were formalized.
Was that better, you think?
Yeah, I think so.
There was a paper trail and we began to keep a folder and a dossier because as you become bigger you probably have more problems.
Were the, as you look back, were there some examples where some people were found wanting that deserved not to be?
Oh, yeah.
Yes, and there were people that probably deserved being terminated.
for reasons other than lack of research.
There were some people whose behavior was questionable with students or with other faculty.
And so you had to.
Unless you had the documentation, you couldn't do anything.
And were there some people who were terminated for appropriate cause?
Yeah, for appropriate cause.
And it took, but you had, I think we just learned over time and grew with it.
I'm not sure, I think had John Pearson stayed on, he probably would have realized he needed that.
But, you know, back in those days, you know, I was at kind of an end of an era.
and the beginning of another one.
And the old rudder way was, damn it, Highway 6 runs both north and south, as you know.
Whereas the other way, it was process.
Process was very important to Mobley.
Process, due process.
Process was very, very important to Mobley.
I think that was because of corporate and being a human resource man.
You praised Williams a while ago.
What about Calhoun as last president, as chief academic officer?
Oh, yeah, I always liked him.
You know, I didn't know too much about him, but I always liked John.
And I don't know much about his personal life.
I think, again, I was one of his more favorite people because of the notoriety I brought Sea Grant.
I was able to get things from a guy by the name of Bob Abel.
Bob Abel ran the C Group program in Washington.
Bob Abel happened to be at a program with John Pierce and walked in while I was giving the presentation and were quite impressed with Adam's presentation.
And then I began to get more and more stuff out of Washington coming to me and of course that made John Calhoun's job easier.
You do know that Calhoun's the one that thought up the Sea Grant.
Yeah, yeah.
He was in the Kennedy administration.
I know that, yeah.
When Williams had the heart attack and they recreated the system and made him the chancellor of the system and appointed Jarvis and then Calhoun resigned,
Did the change at the academic vice president and the president level, did that make any difference?
No, it didn't filter down to us, but, you know, it was clear that there was a lot of machinations going on there, you know, when you begin taking sides between Jarvis and John Calhoun and Jarvis.
And then Jarvis and Frank Huber.